Add runbook for alert PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit (#47)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit.md

# PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit

## Meaning

The alert `PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit` is triggered when at least one of
Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than `body_size_limit`.

## Impact

> The metrics coming from the endpoint will not be scraped each time when
> the response body size exceeds the body size limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics coming from targets responding with a body exceeding the configured size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the `TargetDown` alert.
```

## Diagnosis

First we need check the value of `body_size_limit` in the Prometheus configuration
file, which is saved in the secret `prometheus-k8s` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`.

> Search for the field `body_size_limit`.

Reviewer: I would rather get the value from the Prometheus object.

```
oc get prometheus k8s -o jsonpath='{.spec.enforcedBodySizeLimit}'
```

Author: The value is in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config`, I will add how to find out the bodysize limit from the configmap, too.

```bash
kubectl get secret -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o yaml | grep prometheus.yaml.gz: | sed -e 's/^[ ]*prometheus.yaml.gz: *//' | base64 -d | gunzip -c
```

If the value is too small, we need to set it to a larger number. Please refer to
[Mitigation](#mitigation) on how to change the value.

If the value is correct, we need to find out which target is responding with a body
too large for scraping. To do this, we can query the Prometheus API endpoint `/api/v1/targets`,
in `data.activeTargets` search for those who have `health` field different than `up`,

> checking for the `lastError` field for confirmation:

Reviewer: The targets page (OCP console) should report the faulty endpoints too.

Author: will add a phrase telling user to refer to the target page in UI first. If more information needed, we can also using the API endpoint for more details.

# PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit

## Meaning

The alert `PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit` is triggered when at least one of
Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than the
configured `body_size_limit`.
By default there is no limit on body size of the scrape targets.
When set, this limit prevents Prometheus from consuming excessive amounts of memory
when scrape targets return a response that is deemed too large.

> This must be set explicitly by the cluster administrator.

Reviewer: can be removed since we say above that there's no limit by default?

## Impact

Metrics coming from targets responding with a body exceeding the configured
size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being
down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the
`TargetDown` alert.

## Diagnosis

First, we need to check the value of the configured body size limit.

This value is located in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config` in the
namespace `openshift-monitoring`.

To check the value in configmap, use this command:
```bash
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit
```

If the value is too small, we need to set it to a larger number. Please refer to
[Mitigation](#mitigation) on how to change the value.

If the value is correct, we need to find out which target is responding with a body
too large for scraping.

In the Openshift Web UI, go to the Observe > Targets page and check which
targets are down.

If we need more information than the UI provides, we can query the Prometheus API

> endpoint `/api/v1/targets`.

Reviewer 2: OCP console "Observe -> Targets" page, select the down target and check the down reason from Target details page, example: https://pasteboard.co/R1p2DMFAZO9U.png

Image pull secrets:  prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-6wl6b
Mountable secrets:   prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-6wl6b
Tokens:              prometheus-k8s-token-nwtrf
Events:              <none>
```

2. Decode the token from the secret.

```bash
token=$(oc get secret $secret_name_here -n openshift-monitoring -o jsonpath={.data.token} | base64 -d)
```

3. Get the route URL of the Prometheus API endpoint.

```bash
host=$(oc get route -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o jsonpath={.spec.host})
```

4. List all the scraped targets with health status different than "up".

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $token" -k https://${host}/api/v1/targets | jq '.data.activeTargets[]|select(.health!="up")'
```

5. Check the failling target's response body size. We simulate a scrape of its
`scrapeUrl` using the command below and check for the body size.

```bash
oc exec -it prometheus-k8s-0 -n openshift-monitoring  -- curl -k --key /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key --cert /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt --cacert /etc/prometheus/configmaps/serving-certs-ca-bundle/service-ca.crt $scrape_url | wc --bytes
```

> ## Mitigation

Reviewer: I see 2 options:
* Increase the limit
* Report a bug if you think that the target returns too much data.

We can modify the body size limit by changing the configmap
`cluster-monitoring-config` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`. The field
`prometheusK8s.enforcedBodySizeLimit` defines this limit, accepting [the same size
 format as Prometheus uses](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#size).

 The example below sets the body size limit to 20MB.

 ```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  config.yaml: |-
    prometheusK8s:
        enforcedBodySizeLimit: 20MB
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cluster-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-monitoring

>  ```

Reviewer 2: indentation for `enforcedBodySizeLimit` is not right, should update
```
        enforcedBodySizeLimit: 20MB
```

size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being
down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the
`TargetDown` alert.

## Diagnosis

We can find the value of the configured body size limit in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config`
in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`.

To check the value in configmap, use this command:
```bash
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit
```

To find out which targets are exceeding the body size limit, we can refer
to the Openshift Web UI, go to the Observe > Targets page, and check which
targets are down.

If we need more information than the UI provides, such as discovered labels
and scrape pool, we can query the Prometheus API endpoint `/api/v1/targets`.

In the field `data.activeTargets` search for those that have `health` field
different than `up` and check for the `lastError` field for confirmation:

1. Get the name of the secret containing the token of service account `prometheus-k8s`.
We use the following command and check for the name  `prometheus-k8s-token-[a-z]+`

> in the line `Tokens`. In the example below, the secret name is `prometheus-k8s-token-nwtrf`.

Reviewer: IIRC the SA token isn't populated anymore in the secret. The admin should either create a token as the service account (`oc create token prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring`) or use their own credentials. The first option is probably good enough.

Author: The token seems still to exist in 4.11. Here is what I got from a CI 4.11 cluster:
```bash
➜  oc describe sa prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring
Name:                prometheus-k8s
Namespace:           openshift-monitoring
Labels:              app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus
                     app.kubernetes.io/instance=k8s
                     app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus
                     app.kubernetes.io/part-of=openshift-monitoring
                     app.kubernetes.io/version=2.36.2
Annotations:         serviceaccounts.openshift.io/oauth-redirectreference.prometheus-k8s:
                       {"kind":"OAuthRedirectReference","apiVersion":"v1","reference":{"kind":"Route","name":"prometheus-k8s"}}
Image pull secrets:  prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-bv5pf
Mountable secrets:   prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-bv5pf
Tokens:              prometheus-k8s-token-rs4gf
Events:              <none>
➜  oc version
Client Version: 4.10.16
Server Version: 4.11.0-0.nightly-2022-06-30-005428
Kubernetes Version: v1.24.0+9ddc8b1
```
I will add how to create the token for service account in the paragraph, too.

Author: added an line using this command to create token for prometheus-k8s
`oc sa new-token prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring`

Name:                prometheus-k8s
Namespace:           openshift-monitoring
Labels:              app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus
                     app.kubernetes.io/instance=k8s
                     app.kubernetes.io/name=prometheus
                     app.kubernetes.io/part-of=openshift-monitoring
                     app.kubernetes.io/version=2.35.0
Annotations:         serviceaccounts.openshift.io/oauth-redirectreference.prometheus-k8s:
                       {"kind":"OAuthRedirectReference","apiVersion":"v1","reference":{"kind":"Route","name":"prometheus-k8s"}}
Image pull secrets:  prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-6wl6b
Mountable secrets:   prometheus-k8s-dockercfg-6wl6b
Tokens:              prometheus-k8s-token-nwtrf
Events:              <none>
```

2. Decode the token from the secret.

```bash
token=$(oc get secret $secret_name_here -n openshift-monitoring -o jsonpath={.data.token} | base64 -d)
```

3. Get the route URL of the Prometheus API endpoint.

```bash
host=$(oc get route -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o jsonpath={.spec.host})
```

4. List all the scraped targets with health status different than "up".

```bash

> curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $token" -k https://${host}/api/v1/targets | jq '.data.activeTargets[]|select(.health!="up")'

Reviewer: it might be good to provide an example of the output

Author: an example is inserted at line 39.

```

5. Check the failling target's response body size. We simulate a scrape of its
`scrapeUrl` using the command below and check for the body size.

```bash
oc exec -it prometheus-k8s-0 -n openshift-monitoring  -- curl -k --key /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key --cert /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt --cacert /etc/prometheus/configmaps/serving-certs-ca-bundle/service-ca.crt $scrape_url | wc --bytes
```

## Mitigation

According to the result of the investigation, the cause can be either the limit is
too small or there is a bug in the target causing it reports too many metrics.

> ### Modify Body Size Limit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Increasing the body size limit
```

> We can modify the body size limit by changing the configmap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can modify the body size limit by editing the configmap
```

`cluster-monitoring-config` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`. The field
`prometheusK8s.enforcedBodySizeLimit` defines this limit, accepting [the same size
 format as Prometheus uses](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#size).

 The example below sets the body size limit to 20MB.

 ```yaml
apiVersion: v1
data:
  config.yaml: |-
    prometheusK8s:
      enforcedBodySizeLimit: 20MB
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: cluster-monitoring-config
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
 ```

### Bug in the Scraped Target

> If we believe the scraped target should not have so many metrics,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you believe that the response of the scraped target is too large,
```

> we can report a bug at [Redhat's Bugzilla](http://bugzilla.redhat.com).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can contact the Red Hat Customer Experience & Engagement.
```

# PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit

## Meaning

The alert `PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit` is triggered when at least one of

> Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than `body_size_limit`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than configured `body_size_limit`.
```

By default there is no limit on body size of the scrape targets.

> This limit prevents Prometheus goes out of memory when scrape targets return a
> reponse too large to consume.
> This is set explicitly by the cluster administrator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When set, this limit prevents Prometheus goes from consuming excessive amounts of memory when scrape targets return a response that is deemed too large.
This must be set explicitly by the cluster administrator.
```

## Impact

Metrics coming from targets responding with a body exceeding the configured
size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being
down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the
`TargetDown` alert.

## Diagnosis

> First we need check the value of the configured bodysize limit.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First we need to check the value of the configured body size limit.
```

> This value is located either in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config` in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This value is located in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config` in the
```

namespace `openshift-monitoring`.

To check the value in configmap, use this command:
```bash
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml  | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit
```

If the value is too small, we need to set it to a larger number. Please refer to
[Mitigation](#mitigation) on how to change the value.

If the value is correct, we need to find out which target is responding with a body
too large for scraping.

> In the Openshift Web UI, go to the Oberseve > Targets page and check which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the Openshift Web UI, go to the Observe > Targets page and check which
```

targets are down.

> If we need more information than the UI provides, we can query the Prometheus API
> endpoint `/api/v1/targets`,
> in `data.activeTargets` search for those who have `health` field different than `up`,
> checking for the `lastError` field for confirmation:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we need more information than the UI provides, we can query the Prometheus API
endpoint `/api/v1/targets`.
In the field `data.activeTargets` search for those that have `health` field different than `up` and
check the `lastError` field for confirmation:
```

> 1. Get the name of the secret containing the token of service account `promehteus-k8s`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Get the name of the secret containing the token of service account `prometheus-k8s`.
```

# PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit

## Meaning

The alert `PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit` is triggered when at least one of
Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than the
configured `body_size_limit`.
By default there is no limit on body size of the scrape targets.
When set, this limit prevents Prometheus from consuming excessive amounts of memory
when scrape targets return a response that is deemed too large.
This must be set explicitly by the cluster administrator.

## Impact

Metrics coming from targets responding with a body exceeding the configured
size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being
down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the
`TargetDown` alert.

## Diagnosis

First, we need to check the value of the configured body size limit.

This value is located in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config` in the
namespace `openshift-monitoring`.

To check the value in configmap, use this command:
```bash
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml  | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```bash
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit
```

If the value is too small, we need to set it to a larger number. Please refer to
[Mitigation](#mitigation) on how to change the value.

If the value is correct, we need to find out which target is responding with a body
too large for scraping.

In the Openshift Web UI, go to the Observe > Targets page and check which
targets are down.

If we need more information than the UI provides, we can query the Prometheus API
endpoint `/api/v1/targets`.
In the field `data.activeTargets` search for those that have `health` field
different than `up` and check for the `lastError` field for confirmation:

1. Get the name of the secret containing the token of service account `prometheus-k8s`.
We use the following command and check for the name  `prometheus-k8s-token-[a-z]+`

> under section `secret`. In the example below, the secret name is `prometheus-k8s-token-hxg8v`.

Reviewer 2: due to change, see from https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=2093780
there is not prometheus-k8s-token secret in sa prometheus-k8s
we could use
`token=$(oc create token prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring)`

Author: Thanks :) 
`oc get sa` does not show token secret any more. The name of token secret is still shown by `oc describe sa`. The PR is updated accordingly.

```bash

> $ k get serviceaccount -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o yaml

Reviewer 2: ```
$ oc get serviceaccount -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o yaml
```

# PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit

## Meaning

The alert `PrometheusScrapeBodySizeLimitHit` is triggered when at least one of

> Prometheus' scrape targets replies with a response body larger than `body_size_limit`.

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence explaining that the alert can only fire if someone has configured the body size limit explicitly.

## Impact

Metrics coming from targets responding with a body exceeding the configured
size limit aren't ingested by Prometheus. The targets will be considered as being
down and they will have their `up` metric set to 0 which may also trigger the
`TargetDown` alert.

## Diagnosis

First we need check the value of the configured bodysize limit.
This value is located either in the configmap `cluster-monitoring-config` in the
namespace `openshift-monitoring`, or in the Prometheus configuration
file, which is saved in the secret `prometheus-k8s` in the namespace `openshift-monitoring`.
Search for the field `body_size_limit`.

- To check the value in configmap, use this command:
```bash

> kubectl get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml  | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit

Reviewer: Please use `oc` :)
```suggestion
oc get cm -n openshift-monitoring cluster-monitoring-config -o yaml | grep enforcedBodySizeLimit
```

```

- To check the valude in Prometheus configuration file, use this command instead:
```bash

> kubectl get secret -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o yaml | grep prometheus.yaml.gz: | sed -e 's/^[ ]*prometheus.yaml.gz: *//' | base64 -d | gunzip -c

Reviewer: I still believe that it's too brittle and not really necessary to check the Prometheus configuration.
Checking the value configured in the Prometheus object is good enough from my POV (if the limit isn't propagated to the Prometheus config file, we have a bigger problem).

```
oc get -n openshift-monitoring prometheus k8s -o jsonpath='{.spec.enforcedBodySizeLimit}'
```

```

If the value is too small, we need to set it to a larger number. Please refer to
[Mitigation](#mitigation) on how to change the value.

If the value is correct, we need to find out which target is responding with a body
too large for scraping.

> In the Openshift Web UI, we can refer to the tab Oberseve - Targets, to check which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Openshift Web UI, go to the Observe > Targets page and check which
```

below and skip step 2.b.
```bash
token=$(oc sa new-token prometheus-k8s -n openshift-monitoring)
```

2. b. If the token exists, decode the token from the secret.

```bash
token=$(oc get secret $secret_name_here -n openshift-monitoring -o jsonpath={.data.token} | base64 -d)
```

3. Get the route URL of the Prometheus API endpoint.

```bash
host=$(oc get route -n openshift-monitoring prometheus-k8s -o jsonpath={.spec.host})
```

4. List all the scraped targets with health status different than "up".

```bash
curl -H "Authorization: Bearer $token" -k https://${host}/api/v1/targets | jq '.data.activeTargets[]|select(.health!="up")'
```

5. Check the failling target's response body size. We simulate a scrape of its
`scrapeUrl` using the command below and check for the body size.

```bash
oc exec -it prometheus-k8s-0 -n openshift-monitoring  -- curl -k --key /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.key --cert /etc/prometheus/secrets/metrics-client-certs/tls.crt --cacert /etc/prometheus/configmaps/serving-certs-ca-bundle/service-ca.crt $scrape_url | wc --bytes
```

## Mitigation

According to the result of the investigation, the cause can be either the limit is

> too small or there is a bug in the target causing it reports too many metrics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
too small or there is a bug in the target causing it to report too many metrics.
```

Author: corrected :)
